---
title: Provisioning the Node Resources With NUMA Topology Information
authors:
  - "@AlexeyPerevalov"
  - "@swatisehgal"
owning-sig: sig-node
participating-sigs:
  - sig-node
  - sig-scheduling
reviewers:
  - "@dchen1107"
  - "@derekwaynecarr"
approvers:
  - "@dchen1107"
  - "@derekwaynecarr"
creation-date: 2020-06-19
last-updated: 2020-06-19
status: implementable
see-also:
  - "/keps/sig-scheduling/20200612-deducted-topology-manager.md"


# Exposure Node Resources With NUMA Topology Information

## Table of Contents

<!-- toc -->
- [Summary](#summary)
- [Motivation](#motivation)
  - [Goals](#goals)
  - [Non-Goals](#non-goals)
- [Proposal](#proposal)
- [Design Details](#design-details)
  - [Design based on CRI](#cri)
  - [Design based on podresources interface of the kubelet](#podresources)
  - [API](#api)
  - [Integration into Node Feature Discovery](#node-feature-discovery)
  - [Graduation Criteria](#graduation-criteria)
- [Implementation History](#implementation-history)
- [Alternatives](#alternatives)
  - [Annotation approach] (#annotation-approach)
  - [NUMA specification in ResourceName] (#numa-in-resourcename)
<!-- /toc -->

## Summary

Cluster which contains several nodes with NUMA topology and
enabled TopologyManager feature gate is not rare now. In such cluster
could be a situation when TopologyManager's admit handler on the kubelet
side refuses pod launching since pod's resources request doesn't sutisfy
selected TopologyManager policy, in this case pod should be rescheduled.
Also it can get stuck in the rescheduling cycle.
To avoid such kind of problem scheduler should choose a node considering topology
of the node and TopologyManager policy on the worker node.

## Motivation

For the scheduling which is topology aware, resources with topology
information should be provisioned.
This KEP describes how it would be implemented.

### Goals

Provisioning resources with topology information.

### Non-Goals

 - modification of any public API
 - improving and as a result modification of the TopologyManager and its policies

## Proposal

Add ability to expose resource information of the pod with NUMA topology into Node Feature
Discovery [daemon](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/node-feature-discovery).

## Design Details

The design consists of part which describes how datum collected and how it was provided.

Resources used by the pod could be obtained by [podresources](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/blob/master/keps/sig-node/compute-device-assignment.md) interface of the kubelet.

To calculate available resources need to know all resources
which could be used by kubernetes. It could be calculated by
substracting resources of kube cgroup and system cgroup from
system allocatable resources.

### Design based on CRI

TODO here should be description of daemonset and how it
interacts with container runtime daemon through CRI

collects resources consumed by pod's containers.
And drawbacks of this approach related to information in non
specific field

### Design based on podresources interface of the kubelet

Podresources interface of the kubelet is described in

[pkg/kubelet/apis/podresources/v1alpha1/api.proto](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/master/pkg/kubelet/apis/podresources/v1alpha1/api.proto)

it is available for every process on the worker node by
unix domain socket situated by the following path:

```go
filepath.Join(kl.getRootDir(), config.DefaultKubeletPodResourcesDirName)
```

it could be used to collect used resources on the worker node and to evaluate
its NUMA assignment (by device id)

Currently it doesn't provide information from CPUManager only from
DeviceManager as well as information about memory which was used.
But information provided by podresource could be easily extended
without modification of API.
This [KEP](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/pull/1884) propose such functionality.
Approach based on podresources doesn't have sufficient drawbacks as approach based on CRI, it
looks like preferred way to collect resources consumed by the pod.


### API

Available resources with topology of the node should be stored in CRD. Format of the topology described
[in this document](https://docs.google.com/document/d/12kj3fK8boNuPNqob6F_pPU9ZTaNEnPGaXEooW1Cilwg/edit).


```go
// NodeResourceTopology is a specification for a Foo resource
type NodeResourceTopology struct {
    metav1.TypeMeta   `json:",inline"`
    metav1.ObjectMeta `json:"metadata,omitempty"`

    TopologyPolicy string
    Nodes   []NUMANodeResource   `json:"nodes"`
}

// NUMANodeResource is the spec for a NodeResourceTopology resource
type NUMANodeResource struct {
    NUMAID int
    Resources v1.ResourceList
}
```

The code for working with it is generated by https://github.com/kubernetes/code-generator.git
One CRD instance contains information of available resources of the appropriate worker node.


### Integration into Node Feature Discovery


### Graduation Criteria

* The feature has been stable and reliable in the past several releases.
* Documentation should exist for the feature.
* Test coverage of the feature is acceptable.


## Implementation History

- 2020-06-22: Initial KEP published.

## Alternatives

The provisioning of the resourcees could be implemented also by another way.
Daemon can keep resources in node annotation or in the pod's annotation.
Also kubelet can provide additional resources with NUMA information in ResourceName.

### Annotation approach

Annotation of the node or pod it's yet another place for arbitrary information.

This approach doesn't have known side effects.


### NUMA specification in ResourceName

The representation of resource consists of two parts subdomain/resourceName. Where
subdomain could be omitted. Subdomain contains vendor name. It doesn't suit well for
reflecting NUMA information of the node as well as / delimeter since subdomain is optional.
So new delimiter should be introduced to separate it from subdomain/resourceName.

It might look like:
numa%d///subdomain/resourceName

%d - number of NUMA node
/// - delimeter
numa%d/// - could be omitted

This approach may have side effects.
